if the result of this election comes
that at the end of this exercise in
which he exposes so many people
the liberals return with the minority
what was the point of this
and what happens if the result is let's
be generous to him the liberal
government is returned in a minority
position so we're two years in 400
billion deficit no one wanted the
election you can't tell me what it's
about and at the end of it we're in the
same spot
is this a country or is this some sort
of playground
[Music]
i'm pleased today to be able to discuss
the canadian political landscape with mr
rex murphy
rex is a journalist extremely well known
to canadians he was a
regular host of cbc radio 1's
cross-country checkup a nationwide
call-in show for 21 years before
stepping down in september 2015
i spoke with rex about his career on and
various other matters june 3rd 2021 a
few months ago and that video has
accrued about 800 000 views it's been
very popular and
i read one of rex's columns about uh our
prime minister justin trudeau a couple
of days ago and then
watched the leaders debate and it struck
me that it would be a really good time
to talk to him again about all about a
variety of things but obviously most
importantly for canadians the current
election
uh so we're going to talk about the
it's wise and where force we're going to
talk about the leaders and we're going
to talk about the debate and so thanks
very much rex for agreeing to talk to me
today i'm really looking forward to
hearing what you have to say about all
this let's start with the election so
what's going on why was this election
called what's it about
that is the key question
of this election and it has been the key
question from the very first moment
and for we're in the fourth week now by
the way for the benefit of listeners and
for the first couple of weeks it it
actually threatened to become the issue
of the election in other words
the so-called ballot question which is
how the experts talk of this will be why
did you call the election
well here's something here's background
and it's necessary to have this
background
mr trudeau has been in office for two
years he's received the mandate just two
years ago or less he's had one of the
most comfortable runs as a minority he
won a minority as a minority prime
minister that anybody has ever had
now it's true we were visited by covet
but this this arranged two dynamics
first of all mr trudeau and the ndp
which is the supporting party
have obviously reached some great accord
so mr trudeau has had no no real
challenge in administering his
parliamentary or executive functions
and secondly with the arrival of the
pandemic in particular
this gave great license for abrogating
or staying away from or diminishing
the active uh and full role of the
parliament itself so two things a very
comfortable alliance with the ndp and
the bloc when the occasion demanded it
and secondly because parliament was
effectively eviscerated or gutted it was
closed down
the sessions were limited uh committees
folded mr trudeau himself stayed away
from parliament all his major
announcements for a single year by the
way totaling 400 billion dollars into
deficit
imagine a minority politician o'toole
o'toole said during the debate that the
trudeau government is borrowing 500
million dollars a day yeah is that can
that possibly be true i can't do the
mental derivative but if you talk about
400 billion
then obviously and we have it now we
have a debt that's the deficit a debt
uh some recorded at 1.3 trillion
and one of the public officers who
accounts for canada's finances is saying
that
it may not be paid off until 2070
and at which point it will all have
totaled something like 3 trillion
now when he called the election i'm
giving you all these things that he had
an un on on hindered hand
in racking up the largest amounts of
public spending since the confederation
began
he didn't have to face parliament to any
degree like other prime ministers
because again closed down
all these announcements came from the
steps of his cottage and on the day i
get into your question on the day he
called the election the justification
offered that day and this is why i
wanted to start here
was that he was meeting so much
obstruction in parliament and i said to
myself my holy lord
you know you could combine his father
john even bigger lester pearson than
john a macdonald put them all in one man
and they wouldn't have had anything like
the ease the control
and the absolute dominance
of the parliamentary function the
committees were dissolved the
accountability people didn't have enough
funds the auditor general asked with all
this money going out the window i need
more people to keep it checked there was
no money from the auditor general even
as you spent
400 billion dollars we are not the us
that's the deficit
and he made a pledge in 2015
that by
2019 the deficit of canada would be gone
we would have a balanced budget so let's
start with that one the reason i'm
calling this election
is that the opposition is obstructionist
and i cannot get my way through that was
so palpably
so so absolutely adamantly empty as a
reason
the real reason and a lot of them is
that during that period the polls
were showing that because of all the
money flowing out canadians have never
received directly so many dollars before
and that despite let me go back to this
despite his initial stumblings and there
were many over this pandemic and
scandals
nonetheless he was very popular versus
mr rotu
so there was a hope of a majority and
now i wind this little section down but
it's a very important thing to ask
the hope of a majority said to his
advisors and him okay we have two full
years left
we have an extremely compliant
parliament no other prime minister has
had as easy as us however
if we went now we might get a majority
and there are only two reasons why you
would throw away two years
of an already established mandate
for the hope of four years
on a gamble
the one is the polls the second is this
this is the deeper one for me anyway and
i'm not a conspiracy guy
all that money going out not being
properly accounted for parliament not
exercising its functions
is it possible that the trudeau
government is really really worried
that when the pandemic slows down and
people return their attention to the
administration of government and how and
where
these huge amounts of money went
and how they were supervised how well
they were administered who received them
i think there was a fear that if he
remained in minority
as and the pandemic reduced the pressure
so that the parliament could resume its
function the press could get off the one
topic and they would start to look at
the record of that spending how it was
decided
who established their priorities and on
top of all of that of course we get into
those he said as you know a rain rain a
rain of scandals during this particular
period and maybe he thought an election
could kind of wash that off him but it
was called for only one reason
to secure a majority for the next four
years now how that's going we will talk
about it
well it seems like a strange gamble to
take if if your initial supposition is
correct too which is that he was
essentially
um
leading
a de facto majority government because
of the unconditional support of the ndp
so it seems strange to throw that away
if that's been functioning i mean it's
going to tilt the liberal policy to the
left to some degree but i can't imagine
that that's really that big a problem
for
for mr trudeau
you're pinpointing what is again to me
the this is the unanswerable question
he realized this is not the partisan
observation everyone will tell you this
parliament rarely met it meant only in
in zoom calls uh the press had to stand
every morning outside the cottage the
normal scrutinies the normal dynamics
the internal committees all of this was
abruptly just gone with at the same time
at the very same time there was a motion
made by the then finance minister that
he wanted
the the the the minority government to
have the authority to expend monies for
two years is that made up without
parliamentary approval
that shocked even them and that was
denied however
because of as i say the closet
arrangements between the bq and the ndp
whenever he wanted to shovel out 6
billion here 10 billion there 4 billion
there up to 400 billion yes
okay so let me let me play devil's
advocate here a bit so
we could say
mr trudeau said he would have canadians
backs desperate times require desperate
measures uh canada is rich enough to
afford this large yes so why not open
the pumps and and flood people with
money while they're in this crisis
situation what do you see as the
benefits of that say but also the
long-term medium and long-term dangers
well
in any crisis i mean like the 208
recession uh
prime minister harper released more
money than the prime minister harbor
would normally do
however you see there's there's a double
problem with this particular sure you
have to respond to the pandemic but some
of the responses
are very far from the actual problem
that they're dealing with secondly and
this this this is a very crucial thing
the pandemic had a second dynamic
it shut down all of the businesses
service things hotels taxis construction
projects schools everything is shut down
and the economy of canada during the
last year and a half to two we haven't
got the measure of it it has taken a
devastating
a devastating and a savage hit
so at the very period that your economy
is actually unmeasured because we're not
having the measurements done
hitting a a crater we're shooting a
deficit uh past uranus
and there's no one the parliamentary
budget officer can't get the thing they
ought to the general can't get the press
and this great flood of money keeps
everybody happy so the normal again
the the accoutrements of parliamentary
oversight and accountability are not
there
it was a flood
let's continue the discussion with
regards to what this election is about
and i watched the debate last week and
when i was about halfway through
watching it i had this idea
which was
the
the responses that the leaders that all
the different leaders of the federal
parties had to the questions
that isn't really where the debate was
being won or lost
the debate was won or lost before it
even started
and the reason for that was because of
the topics that were chosen
and so let's look at that let's look at
the debate
from from
as a as a as a what would you say as an
entity in itself forget about the
content the first thing that happened
was that there was a land
acknowledgement indigenous land
acknowledgement
and so that you know i've seen those
things happen over and over and they
always make me wonder it's like well who
decided that every important occasion in
canadian life political life was going
to be signified by one of these land
acknowledgments and
who to who who benefits from them and
what do they really mean and what are
they setting us up for and so i would
say regardless of their intrinsic merit
it's certainly the case that the idea of
indigenous land acknowledgement and that
that should precede every discussion of
import is a progressive idea
and so what that means is the debate is
framed instantly from the perspective of
the progressives and then you look at
the structure of the debate you have
the ndp
left green party left liberals left and
you have the lone conservative aaron
o'toole
and then you have the choice of
questions and i found this so imagine
that the most
significant
piece of information that emerges from
the debate is not how the leaders
responded but what the questions were
because if i wanted to ask a leader
something i'd say well what do you think
the most pressing issues facing
canadians are and then i'd like to hear
the answers but i'd like to know what
are the questions what are the issues
and then by participating in this debate
as it was structured aaron o'toole the
the putative conservative
seeded the
uh conceptual territory so that half the
debate was taken up
on
climate change and reconciliation
and only a quarter of it on
affordability of all the observed topics
that means the economy that means the
entire
the entire business of governance
and so
it's so strange to see
us
framing our entire national discussion
in this
haphazard ad hoc way
that that that
brings a set of presuppositions to the
table before the debate even starts and
and to see no one object to that it's
like is co is climate change really that
crucial a crisis right now i can tell
you first of all i got to
agree with one very big point this
conceptual point
when you set these things up as you say
with a ritual invocation
uh obviously from the book progressive
side you've said the prayer of glad to
acknowledge but you're back in some sort
of progressive church so now you've
established the ethos and the atmosphere
and then and you're absolutely correct
i'm not saying that just the vision
if if
they caught under the debate the
selection of what is to be talked about
is the debate yes absolutely
we should say that over and over we
should say that over and over the
selection of what to talk about is the
debate yeah so it's lost to begin with
by the way
now to get to a particular
the climate change i think you you timed
it with something like 26 minutes in
quebec
in quebec
uh there was a poll on yesterday of the
seven main issues in quebec the seventh
issue the seventh the seventh
was climate change
if you go down to newfoundland and you
try to tell someone down there that
climate change is the number one issue
they'll throw you off a wharf how about
albertans
albertans if you go out there and tell
them that the ruined nation of alberta
and that the war against it's it's it's
it's central and abiding industry and
the threat of taking all the oil workers
off their jobs and sending them out to
mold windmills i was out in alberta just
a week ago
alberta stopping there
alberta should be a topic of the debate
how has it been treated in the last 10
years the elimination of the pipelines
the the
niagara of of obstruction and protest
over a legitimate industry and the
demonization of a single province there
are no demonstrations against china
venezuela russia any of the
oil-producing countries one probably
arabs
one province in one country is attacked
by its own and mr trudeau when he opens
his mouth without the usual guards
speaks about oh we can't close the oil
industry tomorrow
instead go back to your point climate
change gets set up in that thing as if
it's a mobile block that the science is
a single word okay i want to talk a
little bit more about that too i could
go ahead people should be warned about
this okay so i was thinking more about
climate change is that
there is no conceptual difference from a
governance perspective between the terms
climate change
and the terms global governance
and here's why it's because
climate is
the entire planet it's every system in
the planet
and change doesn't mean change it means
existential crisis to paraphrase the
green leader anime paul so think about
what we're doing canadians think about
what we're doing we're taking this
phrase climate change we conceptualize
it as a problem then we conceptualize it
perhaps as a crisis
all right and then we're ceding
administrative power to governmental
officials who parade their commitment to
climate change as a high moral virtue
and then they can say they can point to
any piece of evidence they want that
supports the crisis nature of the
climate change and that's always going
to be there a flood a drought fire
hurricanes that proves that climate
change is not only real but it's an
instant existential crisis and that
you're immoral if you don't put it at
the top of the list and because it means
global governance you essentially seed
all your moral authority and all your uh
policy-making power to any government
that wants to do anything they want as
long as they use climate change as a
justification and that should worry
environmentalists too because what that
does using that catch-all buzz phrase
which really means global governance and
nothing else
is that it obscures the attempts of
anybody serious to deal with micro
problems of the environment that could
actually be solved exactly it's a
terrible thing this this well it's not i
could link it by the way
i don't think this is at all a
far-fetched idea we're we're we're being
heard
in some degree
under the uh
the
the demands of the of the pandemic
itself were becoming more relaxed in in
the suspension or the abridgement or the
abandonment of some of our normal
legitimate
democratic functions and i i see that
the
the pandemic in certain ways
is almost a preparatory course yes that
once once you build a habit oh well this
by the way but people's health is sacred
so you really can't object to us moving
into this terror if you have a good
enough cause you can build up the
administrative state to heights never
seen before but you know what climate
change climate change is the perfect
excuse it's the perfect excuse for that
and you can see and you'd say well
climate change is a terrible catastrophe
and all of that says well i'm i've
interviewed bjorn lomberg a number of
times and if you want an intelligent
discussion about the dangers
he's saying and and the the thing about
lombard too is he cares he's
environmentally a minded person
he does his cost-benefit analysis with
the
input of the best economists in the
world
and he'll take a look at a country his
team takes a look at the country and
says well first of all let's specify the
problems that face us rank order them
and then rank order them again in terms
of how we can spend money the most
efficient way to to make progress on
these areas they do it they have they
have a policy generating apparatus an
analytic apparatus that does that now if
you want good information about the
climate i think lomberg is a a reliable
source it it we can't overstate the
danger of precisely what you said and we
both sound increasing like like a couple
of conspiracy theorists and that's a
terrible thing i mean you're you've been
a mainstream journalist forever and a
very reliable one but it is definitely
the case that we are getting accustomed
to the seeding of our civil liberties
and
as you pointed out as long as the reason
is good enough and you're immoral for
even objecting to the fact of the reason
then you're dead in the water to begin
with and this is happening to the
conservatives all the time and and they
don't object and it's true
two points to come out of this i go back
to your let's say before this particular
period to your main talks uh three and
four years ago
one of the aspects of our current
culture is that a set of managerial or
clerical minds the bureaucrats the
academics the walk
they've given themselves or arrogated to
themselves the right to determine when a
topic is finished and when it is not
and the earliest indication of so-called
cancel culture and i think the most
damning one
goes back to al gore goes back to 2001
and academy awards that once this global
warming and aka climate change aka
global weirdie once it became a big
international political ball the line
was the science is settled in other
words our version of what this thing is
but much more importantly the measures
that we are saying are necessary get
folded into that's the crucial thing
that's the crucial thing
they're trying to tell you in advance
you can't argue the main point my
difficulty with mr o'toole in that
debate goes exactly again to your
understanding mr o'toole is sliding
along with that one if he really
believes that climate change is
existential and that alberta has to rip
up its own economy let them say it
i would much rather see someone in
opposition who said i haven't fully
accepted that this apocalyptic menace
that you've been peddling for 25 years
is an established thing and i certainly
don't accept that i can't argue with you
over the proposals that come out of it
but on that debate everyone had to be
holy and everyone watch your climate
change plan there is no plan in canada
to stop a world event it's it's it's
people not only that
it isn't obvious
it's by no means obvious that we know
how to stop it anyways and it certainly
isn't clear that we know what measures
should be taken i mean the americans
have actually decreased their carbon
output i think it's 14 over the last 10
years why
fracking now you find me one progressive
who bloody well predicted that
and that's that's see you made the point
exactly right is that
people
jump up and down about climate change
and they say the science is settled and
you're a flat earth or a backwards son
of a if you don't agree with it
but that is just a proxy for their claim
that i know how to deal with it and
these policies all of which just happen
to be progressive are the only means by
which this can possibly be redressed and
that is not only patently untrue it's
it's quite clear to me that in all
probability the cure
is going to be far greater than the
disease oh absolutely you well i can't
take this take canada at the present
minute we're reading the election again
the fact that there has the true to a
government in particular because uh
flying virtue flags is about the only
exercise they know how to do perfectly
climate change global warming saving the
world the cop meetings the ipcc this
this is this is to justin trudeau his
idea of the eucharist and he hired one
of the most most adamant intense climate
activist ever gerald butts to be his
principal man this is the key big idea
and it's obsessional ritualistic and in
turtle's case possibly even religious
yes i agree that it's i agree it that
it's religious i one of the things i've
been thinking through psychologically
most recently is the it's the
psychological ramifications and the
political ramifications of the old new
testament statement to render unto
caesar what is caesar's and unto god
what is god
god's and the problem seems to me to be
psychologically is that once you stop
rendering unto god what is god so you
you muddy up the religious domain you
remove it then all sorts of things that
shouldn't become
that shouldn't be religious become
religious
there's no getting rid of the instinct
it just transfers to something else
and this save the planet mentality well
you're landing on it your land
acknowledgements are are a ritual token
exactly by the way exactly even the fact
that the nation's flag
is at half staff i don't know now for
how many weeks yep yeah that's another
religious
by the way our flag is at half-mast
during an election
and we haven't even mentioned
afghanistan but i must go back one more
quick point on the cost of global
warming politics
you've estranged the entire western
provinces
there is so there is real anger there is
real passion and there are certainly
this enchantment that alberta a full
vigorous helpful province that provided
jobs for half of canada during a
recession
is now being targeted because global
warming as the mandarins of ottawa and
montreal and toronto and the news media
they want to be holy on this one as well
alberta has become a leper state
it's a pariah and pete we're risking our
own confederation because of the
obsessions of some of these high-class
ideologues who who do not know reality
yes well we could think broadly speaking
even in terms of the of the future
security of the west as a whole it's
like the americans should be buying oil
from canada and not from the arabs
obviously
and all that's going to happen if we
shut down the alberta industry apart
from the unbelievable economic damage
that it's going to do and the alienation
to that province
and the catastrophic stupidity that's
involved is to cede more power to
states that have held us over a barrel
so to speak a barrel of oil since 1971.
it's like you saw what happened to
germany when they became overdependent
on russia for for for their petroleum
resources yeah it's like we just it's
like we're being we're we're being run
by by naive moralistic children you
talked about this academic codery you
know of people who are holier than thou
i really found that characteristic of
anime paul
the green leader she reminds me of
everything that i detest about academics
the worst academics and there's this
moral superiority combined with this
absolute certainty that
a particular kind of intellectual
approach is
so much superior that anyone who would
dare to question it has to be both
ignorant and malevolent
you're seeing that also in this election
now
i mean mr trudeau goes around like a
spin top
he's now onto this this thing about
vaccination
and that if you if you have a
disposition or a set of arguments i'm
not getting into the vaccination debate
as vaccination
people who have from civil liberties
from the mistrust they have certain
institutions they're they're now
anti-vaxxers in other words their
climate deniers you see we're getting
camps and he's really coming down on
that but this comes as you yeah he said
that he wouldn't he he had no sympathy
for him
no sympathy yep it's so it's so
interesting to see because you you know
a leader should be in some sense
agnostic about such things i would say
i talked to john anderson who was used
to be the deputy prime minister of
australia about covet policy and this is
something we talked about i'd like your
thoughts on it so
this is obviously just a sketch of
proposal so we have all these vaccines
and we've we've and i'm vaccinated by
the way i have two vaccinations so i'm
not saying that because i'm proud of it
or anything like that i just that's what
i did and if people don't want to do it
there are people in my family who don't
want to get vaccinated it's like that's
that's your right it's a fundamental
right i would say guaranteed by the u.n
among other organizations the right to
refuse medical treatment in any case
so we have all these vaccines and
hypothetically they're for everyone's
benefits so you say look
you have until december 15th to be
vaccinated
we're opening everything up
then
and it's on you we're gonna increase icu
spending in case you get sick in case
they have
unvaccinated get sick we still going to
take care of you but we think the
vaccines are effective and they're
available to you and and we can't risk
any more damage to the economy like
anderson's comment was well we've been
letting doctors physicians for example
of a certain stripe let's say drive
political policy
without paying any attention whatsoever
to the
to the burgeoning economic cost of this
what are we going to see rex are going
to see a massive return of inflation
in the aftermath of this when the
economy this is it peters
i think that's that's again go back
right to the very beginning why this
election apart from the vanity of
perhaps getting his majority
that the consequences of the last two
years of policies that have been enacted
the various positions that have been
taken and by the way to multiple
confusions from the beginning we're
going to start seeing some of that and
then when the pandemic finally lives and
the economy is revealed
as the rubble it has become the anger
out there that we may have done all of
this and it may not have been either the
most efficient or even the most correct
and in the meantime we've bankrupted the
entire national treasury there is an
awful wind coming down from the north
over the next year or two and that wind
would have been too strong once it
gets to the violent peak that it would
for his minority government arrangement
to sustain itself he needs a majority
i'm thinking of the damn
the damn throwing chain of buzzard the
game of thrones he needs his ice wall of
a majority government to stay there for
the next four years by the way here's
another little subtext this is very
interesting we're having an election he
summoned all the people of
canada almost 40 million
in the middle of a pandemic
in which social contact is governed and
distancing and masking but he has called
an event together
most multitudes that you possibly could
in the middle of the damn pandemic to
discuss the pandemic
and if he re if the result of this
election comes that at the end of this
exercise in which he exposes so many
people
the liberals return with the minority
what was the point of this
and what happens if the result is let's
be generous to him the liberal
government is returned in a minority
position
so we're two years in 400 billion
deficit no one wanted the election you
can't tell me what it's about and at the
end of it we're in the same spot
is this a country or is this some sort
of playground
well it looks it it
let
let me ask you a question too about the
topics of the debate again because i
want to hit that over and over the fact
that that territory was seated to begin
with people really have to understand
this is that the topics are the debate
because that tells what everyone says is
important okay so
reconciliation we haven't talked about
that yet took up a tremendous chunk of
the debate that's in the middle of the
pandemic and
during the initial phases of what's
likely to be an economic crisis
okay so
so one of the things the debate should
have been about as far as i can tell in
a serious way is the covet shutdown
it's like we need an array of opinions
about exactly what do you do you want to
stay locked down everyone like what sort
of risk are we willing to take
and that's
so that
in my way of thinking that was the
number one topic and this affordability
issue is also so comical it's like
we're the people who put the
top debate topics together
so
ignorant about the way that reality is
structured that they believe that
shoveling every bit of the discussion
about the economy
into one
20-minute section of the debate under
the heading
affordability that that wasn't
appropriate conceptually because isn't
that reminiscent of trudeau's statement
that he isn't interested in monetary
policy isn't that the same thing
revenue but think about it for a second
i underline a different way
i've said twice or three times we have a
400 billion dollar deficit it's historic
a 1.3 trillion dollar debt it's historic
brought in by a prime minister who then
announces is 400 billion 1 trillion 3. i
don't think about monetary policy
put those two together
this this is this this is so much a
disjunctive
anyone who you could only have someone
who doesn't know what monetary policy is
not worry about these things and money
is there to be printed or thrown out
it's
what i see that's what i see
conceptually in the structure of the
debate it's like oh well just that all
that kind of detailed nonsense that's
for lesser minds we'll just shovel that
under affordability and we'll donate 20
minutes to it because we know how
important can that possibly be compared
to
uh well
well on that debate there's one that i'd
like you to consider
this election was called as i said in
the middle of a pandemic but it also
happened on the same day and i really
like your opinion on this and on the
same hour almost
that an episode in afghanistan it took
20 years
and in the case of some of our soldiers
well over a decade 158 did so many
wounded families
we had honor trips we had journalists
going to afghanistan we made pledges to
the girls and women feminism was going
on and when the day that it shuts down
and the taliban walk in and nullify and
canadian citizens are stranded and
fixers and interpreters that work with
our soldiers and our journalists are
there
and he calls an election
boris johnson was the next day
re-summoned parliament do you realize
how little debate we've had on an issue
i was at the journal at the national for
this the amount of coverage of the
canadian soldiers in afghanistan and
what they were doing and what they were
suffering in the hall the the the the
highway of heroes the great boost the
trip still and suddenly
it's just not there
why why is not the government saying to
the mothers and fathers of those
veterans that lost their lives
to the soldiers who were there we now
wish to speak to you you gave us 11
years of living life
and it's just it turns to a nullity i
must direct some of my political advice
or or or or understanding
to you because you must be sitting there
saying
why did i go over there
what about myself that i can't get back
okay okay so let's take a brief foray in
that direction i mean i've been watching
to some degree i'm certainly no expert
well i'm no expert in any of this that's
for sure i'm just watching with my jaw
gape fundamentally
the state department the u.s keeps
sending out missives that are sort of
reminiscent of our our federal cabinet
ministers comment about the taliban
being our brothers it's like they're
surprised they seem surprised that they
seem to expect that the taliban would
first of all abide by some sort of like
quasi-progressive international
standards that they would have something
resembling an inclusive government which
which meant including women and
for example just just to begin with that
they would act like
antibiotics people who were completely
unlike the taliban
and now and now with that that isn't
happening which everyone could have
predicted
with absolute certainty
the the state department seemed to be
those of surprise it's like well this
isn't what we expected it's and so i
would presume that
that that sort of thinking must have
permeated the trudeau cabinet or looks
like it because otherwise why would she
say such a thing or are they pretending
you you ha you'd have to be you would
have to be a b truck
not to know what taliban is like
and if you look even even yesterday even
yesterday i saw pictures of two
journalists they were stripped to the
waist and their legs were bare
and they were striped with awful stripes
you saw another woman getting savagely
beaten
uh you see now that they've divided the
roles you know that this is a
fundamentalist tyrannical barbarous
government but what
upsets me and what i think should be or
almost not almost morally in this
election
we made a moral commitment which we
didn't have to make but if you make them
you better hang on to them and we talked
so loud and so proudly of what canada
canada's back was doing for all these
wretched people in afghanistan who had
suffered but now we're building schools
and we're building water stops
and we were and some of the canadians i
met many canadian soldiers coming back
you know they were so happy that they
were doing something for people less
well-off
and when the whole enterprise collapses
the next speech the next day is we're
going to send 500 million dollars to
seniors do you not speak to the biggest
foreign policy issue of the last 10
years involving the most respected
institution in this country which is its
military and go to your point on a
debate and we only have one in english
you don't have afghanistan on it at all
can you yeah well that's military policy
that's another one of those sort of
messy details you know that that people
who are high-minded don't ever give any
consideration to especially not when we
can have discussions about global
salvation and climate change
and that climate change is lovely too
for for people who who
can speak
who
who want to speak in what would you call
them
impressive cliches because
it isn't an actual problem in that
it's an actual problem has to be
conceptualized as small enough in some
sense so that you could hypothetically
take action that would have a fairly
determinate outcome right so you have to
break it down into a a problem that's
manageable very very difficult thing to
do with when you're talking about
something like climate change which
involves i'm going to fix the world's
weather yeah
yeah exactly what i'm going to retool
i'm going to retool energy policy
globally it's like really are you you
really you can't even you don't even
know how your car works here's here's
the test and this is a really good one
and i think it's extremely pertinent
i wrote a little thing not because i
wrote it i wrote a little thing i
believe you on climate change and i
believe you have the technical expertise
to do it and i believe that canada can
actually be the fundamental lever to
change the climate of the world but
first i'm on a small demonstration
you promised that we wouldn't have any
boil water
advisories on a number of localized
indigenous reserves these are small
projects
environmental projects too when you
think about them tell you what when
every single oil advisory is canceled
and when the water on all the reserves
is completely safe and the promises you
have made for 30 years on this minuscule
problem minuscule in comparison to
global warming then bring in your global
warming agenda the problems they can
deal with they
depart from the problems that they know
they can't handle they're more than
willing to talk forever about them and
they're all in 2050 or 2075 or 21 20.
they like the problems 50 years out the
one up north and the promise made in
2015 that these advisories would be over
that's just well that's a problem we
could solve so obviously we're not going
to give us the ones we can't
so let's talk a bit about this
reconciliation issue too because that
was one-fifth of the debate
and so
um
the the basic proposition is something
like the the indigenous people of canada
have had uh
uh hard time
historically speaking and
uh the federal and provincial
governments have been complicit in that
and by extension
all those who are part of that
governmental structure and and and fair
enough and and but then i was listening
and and
i have some familiarity with native
culture not not a lot
and
some real sympathy for
people who survived the worst of the
residential schools and i know someone
i'm very close to someone who was
brutalized beyond comprehension
in such a system it was it's appalling
what happened to him and to people like
him but then
i didn't hear any straight talk about
the reserves themselves and and i'm
going to go way out a limb here
but you know that's what you do i think
if you're
you want to address these things with
some amount of content
most of the reserves that i'm familiar
with are like small towns that's the
closest analogy
and if you go out west for example and
you see this all across north america
all the small towns have dried up all of
them there's hundreds and hundreds of
basically abandoned small towns in
saskatchewan
and so
what's the long-term economic viability
of these small town reserves
is anybody ever going to talk about that
because there is none as far as i can
tell even hypothetically how is it
possible for that
system and structure to survive and if
we don't address that in something like
a national debate that's focused on
reconciliation which i think is the
elephant under the rug it's like why in
the world should we assume that we're
any more honest than
the ants our ancestors who were
continually apologizing for yeah so
am i way out of line there like well
again you you've hit
climate change is one this is not false
this is actually the case climate
changes is one of the sacred topics for
85 percent of journalists politics uh
your consultant class you're not
supposed to go to the center to think in
other words why would you want to close
close down uh alberta but you want to
criticize china that's logic in the case
of the indigenous issues in this country
i don't have
anything like the amount of knowledge
you have and even if yours is scant but
i do know this that if you if you wish
to talk about indigenous affairs there's
already a structure there's already a
set of attitudes you're only supposed to
speak in a certain direction and
especially if you're a
white journalist wants to comment on it
at all
this is already surrounded by a number
of media taboos you can't put topics off
limits
and then demand the change
it's again it's like the global warming
debate i would like to see finally some
people of genuine disinterest
disinterest
high intelligence and perfect
credentials with no ties to anything
else but science give me a reading
in the case of the indigenous reserves i
it's the same in not it's a parallel in
newfoundland we have the small outports
collapsing because the economy is dying
over the last five or six years there is
no way in the world
that these towns that lasted for so so
long can live any longer now you're not
allowed precisely to ask that question
in the current context and so the debate
is not only crippled it's stealthified
from the beginning
so what that means is that the whole
reconciliation exercise is going to end
up being a show being nothing but
another pack of lies
well they
remember again the
tremendous inquiry missing women and did
you and murdered women that was
that was supposed to be a great
opening of the doors and the final
effort it becomes something else we had
the tremendous parliamentary apology
when uh harper was prime minister in
which the leaders women and male of the
aboriginal were in the house account
that was supposed to be a significant
constitutional moment
it meant that okay we can abandon the
structure of hostility under which we're
talking and now we can bend our minds to
the future and to the actual fixing of
the physical things that need to be done
however as soon as the great glory and
the ceremony was over and it was a
formal
parliamentary apology
we're still having apologies
will people wake up and see that this is
just form this is the genuflection in
the church this is another one of those
rights that we go through not substance
send send 200 civil servants with
engineering degrees to these places if
it's just the water problem
and i cannot believe in the 21st century
you can't get the the wells clean or the
streams dried and yet we talked about
that in 2015 and you're talking about it
in 2021 so when you hear reconciliation
or new understanding or a land
acknowledgement that's the kind of
spiritual tax that you pay because you
don't do anything
and so do you think that my analogy
between the
the
at least a sizable
proportion of the reserves and the
doomed small towns across canada does
that seem accurate to you
then there's the problem of of endemic
alcohol abuse which no one will talk
about and i'm not pointing a finger in
blaming i mean not at all and i come
from an isolated northern community and
i know what that's like but it's like we
are children we can't have a serious
discussion about these things it's like
okay there's a terrible problem yeah
well terrible problems are really hard
to talk about just exactly what is the
problem that's this is the mark of
current sculpture and civilization and
media you have crime problems in toronto
what's the solution ban long-range we
know it's not ban long rifles we know
that there are thugs with handguns that
they get from the states they are in
specific quarters of these cities we
have had this gun argument
unrelated to the actual facts of the
case because if you cite those facts
specifically you will be hounded with
all sorts of the new anatomists of
racism and home whatever the particular
cause is if you bring up the actual
items that give great disparity to
native peoples in this country all of
them then you will be under attack for
something else again it is a mark of
western discussions in western politics
that we have a in we have a an automatic
and silent cancellation mechanism here's
the amount of intelligent remark
which will permit in an open room and by
the way so many people who make these
little discussions and have these grand
conferences
they know they are empty from the
beginning because they know they're not
saying 90
of what they know and it goes to other
issues too it goes to teaching in school
the trans movement uh the idea that this
is this special services guy yesterday
180 pounds or something strangled some
woman and no one will stand up and say
you know something you're mad you're
crazy and the idea we let a special
service service and you're sadistic and
you're sadistic and you're narcissistic
and you're a man who just beat the hell
out of a woman and is bragging about it
yeah but this is but it's an index i'm
going to use an exact it's an index of
this curious
bending of the mind
the the shutting down of three quarters
of the processes of the mind to
accommodate woke culture political
correctness where
in the last interview we had the more
calm one
we were throwing away the intellectual
credibility and integrity of western
thought and it finally rolled you can
see so yeah you look at look at see
what's happening just watch as that as
that continues to deteriorate we're
going to have debates structured like
the one we just saw where we we seed the
territory right from the beginning and
we don't even notice
and there are no tools if he were a real
opposition leader instead of going along
with the group here he would have stood
in the middle when his turn came
and said i've seen the debate function
and i've seen the list of questions here
uh they're all off uh you're not dealing
with the separate ones i disagree with
the format i think
make the case challenge the assumptions
but no no
i've seen this
i've seen this time and time again with
conservatives
they they don't notice when they've been
beat to begin with
and they won't object and a lot of its
terror a lot of its terror about being
singled out and mobbed
and like this this this incursion of
morality into the political domain is
really hard on people because it is hard
to be singled out and mobbed and it is
hard to be pilloried for your immorality
just because you're trying to think but
it's also subtle
you know it took me till halfway through
the debate till i realized that oh i see
this was lost on the center on the right
and on the right this was lost to begin
with of course it was who cares what
anyone says it's it's like you already
agreed to the terms of the conversation
and that bigger point about the debate
is something else as i've noted there
were two in quebec and one one
we are a democracy of 40 million people
10 provinces three vast landscape and
there are in my judgment there are five
separate mentalities or maybe six of
canada the atlantic region quebec has
its own obviously ontario you understand
the prairies bc is its own place the
north and other things
there there are no
there's no possible reason in a national
election that you don't at least visit
five of the separate regions and have
the local people in those regions but as
an audience and as a panel
tell the politicians what the issues are
instead we've shrunk it to one little
tiny thing
with a gallery of the most cases the
usual journalists we cram four and five
leaders three of whom shouldn't be there
the debate itself was negatory it was
audios it was empty
we need much more we're allowing
politics to be managed by the
politicians and the journalists and this
election is one of the most cynical i've
ever seen
so let's talk about the leaders let's
say okay also about the about the sort
of stunning absence of maxine bernier i
mean
you have
the person that i was most impressed
with i would say in the debate all
things considered was probably the block
quebecois leader much as i hate to say
that i mean there's lots of his policies
that i find rather um well let's say not
in the best interests of canadians per
se but i mean he makes no bones about
that so but he was the only person who i
saw in that whole debate sort of hold
his own against the moralizing of the
journalists yeah and also who who dared
at least upon occasion to to say what he
thought
and
it was the rest of it seemed to be to be
an exercise in not stepping on a mine
something like that
and exercising not saying anything that
was going to cause trouble or
so
um anime paul
it was strange that she had it's a
strange thing to see her
discuss on equal footing in some sense
with the prime minister and and the
leader of the opposition that that's a
that's a very strange thing because
she doesn't have the
political
support to justify that and i know
that's hard it's hard to figure out who
to include in these leadership debates
or not but
that was another example of seeding the
territory in a terrible way
so
well there's two things i'd like to say
about it but that particular one
green
is another religious subject so it's a
lot harder uh
from the point of view of correctness to
keep up the green person but
the biggest objection to anime paul not
on our person at all
is that we've seen in the last two and
three and four weeks uh that her her
green party is essentially a live
grenade uh busily destroying itself
and the idea that the leader of a party
that is obviously in self
self dissolution gets to stand up uh in
the full leaders debate that's comical
she's a nice woman she's very smart a
couple of really good lines but
what is this party of two of which she
is not the one in the house
in the house of parliament
doing eating up the time on the stage we
should have debate between leaders who
can become prime ministers and secondary
debates among those who aspire and they
should be canada-wide and they should
not be limited to one english debate
with about 400 people on stage
this is really a folly
and as far as you get she's there but
elizabeth may is still
whatever she's doing she is still the
green party and the green party is now
more and the israel than it is pro-earth
so tell me let's okay do you have
anything else that you wanted to say
about the about the debate we really
really haven't talked anything about the
content eh about about what the various
leaders actually had to say on each of
these topics
well just one more thing on the debate
in canada over the years we have allowed
the actions of politics to become so
professionalized
uh it used to be an amateur effort you'd
round up your buddies and you'd do all
this campaigning even a year in advance
now you have the consultants the
strategy teams the experts hired from
down in the states you've got people who
make a living just running political
campaigns you have the tv consultants
and the fashion consultants and it's all
some great glorious meeting of these
very brilliant
and and yuppie uh fixtures but as far as
going out and saying oh i think i'll
take three
check justin oriano too uh really i'll
drop the goddamn
entourage i go up and i'm gonna sit in
this this reserve for a week and a half
uh i'm gonna actually look and see what
it's like or i'll go over to northern bc
and see what those guys are at how many
cabinet meetings have been held in fort
mcmurray to actually hear the views of
those who are under the sale
of their principal policy you can go to
paris you can go to rio de janeiro you
can go to glasgow in november but you
can't visit the site
where the people the people are working
it's become professionalized it's become
a hobby it's become a game
and the the calling of this election
there was no motive for it there was no
national crisis there was no specific
occasion on which mr trudeau looked
around in the house of commons and said
this this house can no longer function i
must call it and here is the issue
so the debates are all part of that
plastic effort to make it look real it's
a game played by the people within it
and
people i talk to generally
the people you meet on the streets and
everywhere else
they have no time for this at all
they really say get it over with what
are we doing here and then
it's in the middle of the pandemic
at the time that afghanistan is being
overrun by militant
i think it's so sad
so let me ask you you've been watching
politics for a very very long time and
and and thinking about it for a very
very long time and so
would you look at justin trudeau
i'd like your opinion about trudeau and
what he and who he is and what he's done
over the last couple of years and and
i'd like you to maybe contrast him with
other
leaders that canada's had that you've
been relative intimately familiar with
or or at least compared to most people
and so like what do you what do you see
well i seen the case of mr trudeau i'll
keep it as
as mild as i can uh
the capacity is not there
if you contrast him
with stephen harper or his father
and i did have a couple of lengthy
sessions with
pierre trudeau
and it's not to be mean
but but the contrast between the
capacity
uh the range of knowledge
uh depth of personality
is really something else in the case of
mr harper the contrast there is and i
just just a side note i do not
understand why
harper has become such a
symbol of a venomous beer he's a sauron
he's a very intelligent
quite diligent
introspective
and concerned about actually doing the
task i think harper was one of the
most modest
in company in terms of public display
but when we come now to the current
situation the preparation is not there
it was a kind of idle life
i found the episode in india more
more distressing than probably most
other people it wasn't the fact that
he adopted the costume of a foreign
country and he's prime minister of this
one
is that he was done for so long
it was five or six days
in which a prime minister of the great
first world country visiting another of
deep civilization
conducts this this this play with this
whole family
and then we come to this present moment
he makes these commitments he's a
feminist well he chases the three
strongest women in his cabinet one is a
white doctor one is an aboriginal lawyer
one is is one of the most dynamic black
candidates that we have ever seen he
hits all the bases that he's supposed to
admire
every single major theme
diversity respect equality inclusion
women feminism every single one of these
have been tumbled down and i you said
the contrast with others i could
contrast with some premiers
uh i know that joey smallwood in his day
became hectic careless and scandal
written i know other premiers were as
well
if i were to contrast it with peter
lawhead lawhead had to gravitas that
when he spoke
to there's something yeah that's a very
good point in this particular period of
the pandemic the economic distresses
that are going to hundreds of thousands
of houses in this country
and the shadow of afghanistan
our leaders should have a podium some
once or twice to come out and speak as
the prime minister of canada not the
liberal
not that canada here's where we are
people of canada i know what you are
enduring not sloganizing we got your
back and i'm spending this money so you
no
here's the serious situation and there
are bigger things coming up maybe harder
things
maybe the next two years won't be
building back better maybe we're going
to be facing a period of real urgency
and demanding more work than we've ever
done and we may have to cut back
but i want you to know i'm here and i'm
not here to divide you and i'd like to
you know take the pressure off of
alberta if it's at all possible stop
picking on one province
where's the leader doing that mr o2 but
i'm saying all that about mr trudeau mr
o'toole is a quieter man and i think he
probably has more depth in in terms of
character because of what he was but he
seems to me to be playing
a political game where's this where's
the strong i think poor i think that
he's been he's been handled into no
that's a bad sign a liberal essentially
into into basically adopting the liberal
policy
is he's he's accepting the ethos that
you don't offend yes yes and that's
that's a bad thing because you you need
spine
you need the integrity of someone i've
actually thought about that meaning the
leader i've actually thought about this
and you know
it's going to be hard news for you folks
but this is what we're going to do now
but this campaign so far they've jumped
from abortion uh to gun rights uh to the
anti-vaxxers i'm skipping a couple
they've tried out various little buttons
to see if they can make the puppets
dance which tell me only one thing they
do not have an issue
they called it for nothing except
they're either worried about the next
two years and wanted better cover or
because the polls told them they could
get a majority in other words it was
internal it was it was of them it was of
the politicians not of the public
i'm preaching at you so what what made
me skeptical about trudeau to begin with
i'd like your opinion on this is that
it wasn't obvious to me that he had the
preparation for the job
by any stretch of the imagination it's a
very hard job and it is a job that would
be too hard for me i i know that and and
so i'm not saying this as someone who
thinks he could step in and and do this
properly it's a very stressful job but
it's very complicated
but i think that also means that you
have to be very careful when you decide
that you're the guy to do it and
if if mr trudeau's last name had been
anything other than trudeau
he wouldn't have ever been the leader of
the liberal party or the prime minister
of canada and it seems to me it isn't
clear to me how you'd have to think
in order to think that that was actually
okay
like what do you what do you have to
think to believe that oh well you know i
really don't know how to do this i'm not
prepared for it i don't have the
educational background or the
experiential background
but
everyone knows my name i've got name
brand recognition man i've really got
that and so it's okay if i'm prime
minister it's like actually it's not
okay
actually that's
that's requiring a
a a degree of introspection that i
wouldn't anticipate but here's a there's
a real answer
uh and it just it just doesn't relate
just to him at all
we've now entered this new world where
the celebrity the word celebrity has
changed since 1970 you know where
someone uh pumps up their rear end and
becomes an international star uh people
who who exist only on the tinsel
of celebrity which celebrity is fame
without achievement if you want to have
real definition fame with nothing behind
it
and in this new world if you have a name
or if you're flashed on a screen or if
you can get involved magazine
you take
the advantages that come with it
and if that means a hundred million
dollars to do with netflix for dreary
megan and whatever his name is
or if i can wander into the political
office for five years and i i have my
subordinates and friends take care of
the problems uh i i like the altitude
and i like the exhibition
and i like the fact that you know the
world's going to be looking at me for
the first year and a half incidentally
it was difficult to determine whether he
was going to end up in people magazine
or foreign policy but it was obviously
people magazine you know i'm using an
old reference
celebrity culture modern culture is is
all over itself giving positions and
authority
to those who wield them only for the
status attached to them and not for the
competence that they bring to the task
look at journalism
well so the well the question is there
how how is it that you justify that to
yourself in your own mind do you say
something like well look the liberal
party came to me
and then they did come to him and you
know
maybe better the liberals than anyone
else and i do have the name brand
recognition and yeah
i mean what's the rationalization there
well there's the and the other
rationalization and i pity them if they
believe it
by pitying them if they believe it uh on
hardcore liberals i'm not a liberal or
conservative in any formal sense among
hardcore liberals uh conservatives are
looked down upon as neanderthal or
racism or nazis harper really is a demon
now if you can believe that
you've either taken leave of your mental
faculties or they never visited in the
first place but there are some liberals
and i think justice one he said there
before he was prime minister
he was in an interview in quebec
that you know if the policies of stephen
harper were to be the continue in canada
if canada became the canada of the
stephen harper policies then he would
have to consider separation
i don't know
where he got that but the idea that
stephen harper was a malignant
administrator of this country
is worse than insult and then because
i'm so honorable i would have to say
let's take quebec out of canada that's a
delusion and even two days ago when he's
asked other questions about vaccinations
and stuff
he hauls poor old stephen harper must be
very tired and getting getting hauled
out of the closet every six days by
justin trudeau
um no it's the carelessness of the
modern age people take on tasks they're
not acquainted with uh liberals are the
savior of the world oh yes go back to
the very beginning i'm also one i will
be leading the salvation of the world
because i will tackle global climate
change
religious
messianism is a well-known phenomenon
you've got a slight instance of it here
transferred to politics it's not the
introspection you're looking for the
cloud comes down he said as he said it
to his wife sophie and you think i was
put on earth for this
that's a bad attitude to have if you're
entering politics
it really is
so we've done a lot of complaining you
and me oh i'm ready for the situation
yeah yeah and so and we're you know
we're fortunate to be in the position
where we can complain and we can
complain freely
and
so far so far
um
where do we go from here like
where did canadians go for here from
here what do we do with this election
and and
it what do you see our way forward
properly i know those are they're
naive questions in some sense i suppose
but but not but they are the questions
but
not the problem
the fact is of course the election is
only the illustration
of the deeper problem and the deeper
problem and not being pretentious is
what we have we talked about for a
considerable time in the previous
interview
this is just an instance of an ethic
of a style it's an instance of
the new western attitude where you
self-derogate
where you attempt to your own
advantage when you take on guilts that
are not your own
when you assume virtues and you assume
that the assumption of the virtues is
the performance of the virtues which is
not true in other words it's idle in
that sense it's vain in another and
we've allowed our intellectual
capacity
to greatly devolve
we've we've outlawed honest a strong
argument and instead we're trafficking
and this is many from the left we
traffic in ugly insults and
and horrible terms and chase people off
platforms this is the 21st century in a
western democracy
as we said in the lesson so
how do you think that in such a context
when the schools
are running mad with their cult favorite
causes rather than doing the job of
teaching literature and music and
mathematics when the universities have
allowed great streams of third grade and
fourth rate fallacious thought wander in
how do you think politics would be
spared from this
we are a harvest of things past where we
go from here
i suppose
it is feeble you just keep pointing that
we must return to some solid sanity some
solid rationality we must respect the
virtues that got us where we are
we must be grateful to the people who
went before us and we must become
serious again
i think we
by our our standing of living and the
fact that we've been secure
since the second world war in the main
sense
and we have not had the probations of
our pioneer fathers or mothers has made
us careless
and has allowed to evaporate
the very the very central
characteristics of personal character
that brought us here
maybe maybe hurt will remind us that we
have to relearn
the very things that gave us what now we
seem to be abandoning
sorry to go on
no
i think that's a good place to close
[Music]
you